---
layout: talk
title: "Lab 3(a): Setting up the Type Checking Project (2020)"
tag: project
categories: []
kind: Project Set-up
series: project
speaker:
authors:
pdf:
image: /project/2021/00-lab1a/spoofax.png
talkURL:
eventURL:
event:
references: [Spoofax2020]
admin: true
permalink: /lab/3a
redirect_from:
- /lab/3a
---

For the course project and for some of the homework assignments we will use the Spoofax Language Workbench.

Follow the instructions from [Lab 1(a)]({{site.baseurl}}/lab/1a/) for using Spoofax.

#### Creating the Project

Create a new language project using `File ‣ New ‣ Project ‣ Spoofax Language Project` for the [type checking assignment]({{site.baseurl}}/lab/3c/) with the following parameters:

* Project name: `chocopy.types`
* Use default location: []
* Location: your gitlab repository
* Identifier: `chocopy.types`
* Name: `chocopy`
* Version: `0.1.0-SNAPSHOT`
* Group identifier: `org.example`
* Extensions: `cpy`
* Syntax type: `SDF3`
* Analysis type: `Statix`
* Generate examples project: [x]
* Generate unit testing project: [x]

This will give you three directories in your gitlab repository:

* `chocopy.types`
* `chocopy.types.example`
* `chocopy.types.test`

#### Configuring the Project

By default, the start symbol for a project is set to `Start`. We want to change that to `Program`, the start symbol of the ChocoPy grammar. This requires changes in a couple of files:

* Set `language.sdf.jsglr-version: layout-sensitive` in `metaborg.yaml`
* `chocopy.types/syntax/chocopy.sdf3`: rename `Start` => `Program`
* `chocopy.types/editor/Syntax.esv`: Start => Program
* `chocopy.types/trans/statics.stx`:
  - rename `Start` => `Program`
	- add `imports signatures/chocopy-sig`
	- remove signature for `Start` and `Empty`
* `chocopy.types/trans/analysis.str`: rename `Start` => `Program`
* Remove the line with `- org.metaborg:dynsem:${metaborgVersion}` from `metaborg.yaml`
* In the file `trans/analysis.str file`, change `pre-analyze = explicate-injections-chocopy-Start` to `pre-analyze = explicate-injections-chocopy-Program` and change `post-analyze = implicate-injections-chocopy-Start` to  `post-analyze = implicate-injections-chocopy-Program`.
* Include the types projects in the [Maven build for CI]({{site.baseurl}}/lab/1d/#continuous-integration-ci) and add `<relativePath />` in the `<parent></parent>` section of the types projects pom files

#### Copy Syntax Definition

Copy the syntax definition from your `chocopy.syntax` project to the `syntax/` directory of the new language project.
Improve the syntax definition where necessary.
Back-port the changes to the syntax project.
We will grade your syntax again in the final milestone of the project.

#### Creating the Static Semantics

In the files `/trans/statics.stx` define the Statix rules that define the static semantics of ChocoPy. Statix is a modular language. It is probably a good idea to distribute your Statix definition over multiple modules.

### References
