---
layout: talk
title: "Lab 1(a): Setting up Spoofax"
tag: project
categories: []
kind: Project Set-up
series: project
speaker:
authors:
pdf:
image: /project/2020/00-lab1a/spoofax.png
talkURL:
eventURL:
event:
date: 2020-09-08 10:00
references: [Spoofax2020]
admin: true
redirect_from:
- /lab/1a
---


For the course project and for some of the homework assignments we will use the [Spoofax Language Workbench](http://metaborg.org/).

### Installing Spoofax

Download from the [Artifacts of cs4200](https://buildfarm.metaborg.org/view/CS4200/job/metaborg/job/spoofax-releng/job/cs4200/lastSuccessfulBuild/artifact/dist/spoofax/eclipse/), the Premade Eclipse installation for your operating system. Choose the "Eclipse with embedded JRE"; this ensures that you have the right version of Java.

Note that this is a special snapshot for the course.

Follow the [installation instructions](http://www.metaborg.org/en/latest/source/install.html).

From now on we will use 'Spoofax' to mean 'Eclipse with the Spoofax plugin'.

#### Configuring Eclipse

You may configure Eclipse to your liking using the `Preferences` dialog. Some typical settings to adjust:

* `General ‣ Appearance`: Choose a Theme to your liking
* `General ‣ Appearance ‣ Colors and Fons ‣ Text Font`: The [JetBrains Mono](https://www.jetbrains.com/lp/mono/) font supports ligatures and is used in (most of) the lecture slides (install separately).
* `General ‣ Keys`: choose `Emacs` for emacs key bindings

### Spoofax Language Projects

In Spoofax you develop a programming language in a 'language project'.

#### Creating a Project

To create a new language project use `File ‣ New ‣ Project ‣ Spoofax Language Project`.

Set the following configuration parameters to create the project for your [syntax definition](/project/2020/09/08/lab1b/):

* Project name: `chocopy.syntax`
* Use default location: []
* Location: your gitlab repository
* Identifier: `chocopy.syntax`
* Name: `chocopy`
* Version: `0.1.0-SNAPSHOT`
* Group identifier: `org.example`
* Extensions: `cpy`
* Syntax type: `SDF3`
* Analysis type: `None`
* Generate examples project: [x]
* Generate unit testing project: [x]

This will give you three directories in your gitlab repository:

* `chocopy.syntax`
* `chocopy.syntax.example`
* `chocopy.syntax.test`

#### Configuring a Project

By default, the start symbol for a project is set to `Start`. We want to change that to `Program`, the start symbol of the ChocoPy grammar. This requires changes in a couple of files:

* `chocopy.syntax/editor/Syntax.esv`: Start => Program
* `chocopy.syntax/syntax/chocopy.sdf3`: Start => Program

Apply analoguous changes to the `chocopy.types` project (once you create it).

In the file `metaborg.yaml` remove the line
```
- org.metaborg:dynsem:${metaborgVersion}
```

#### Building a Language Project

In Eclipse, you build a project by choosing `Project ‣ Build Project` or by pressing the corresponding keyboard shortcut (OS X: Cmd + Alt + B, Enter).
(Note that you should be in the context of the language project, e.g. while the focus is a file in the syntax definition.)
When you later rebuild your project, any open ChocoPy editor is updated to the new version you just built.

To get feedback on the building progress, open the Eclipse console via `Window ‣ Show View ‣ Console`.
In some cases, it is necessary to select `Other` and then type `Console`.
<!-- is this still the case? -->

#### Testing the Generated Editor

You can test the generated editor in the same Eclipse instance.
Create example ChocoPy programs in the `chocopy.syntax.example` project with file extension `.cpy`.
You can test the editor by first building your language project and opening a ChocoPy program.
The editor should provide syntax highlighting and inline error messages.

#### Running SPT Tests

In the `chocopy.syntax.test` project, create tests using the [SPT testing language](http://www.metaborg.org/en/latest/source/langdev/meta/lang/spt/index.html).
Once you build your project, you can run the tests in your test project.
Select a test file or a directory with test files and run `Spoofax (Meta) ‣ run (all) selected tests`.
See als the [next project assignment](/project/2020/09/08/lab1b).

#### Show Parsed AST

Use `Spoofax ‣ Syntax ‣ Show parsed AST` in an editor to test your abstract syntax definition interactively.
When you change a ChocoPy program in the editor, it is necessary to select `Show parsed AST` again to visualize its corresponding AST.
You might notice that the editor will give you an AST even for syntactically incorrect programs.
This is because Spoofax editors support syntactic error recovery.

### Agile Language Engineering

Spoofax supports short development cycles.
This enables you to develop your language definition step by step.
In each step, you focus on a single aspect,
 for example a particular nonterminal symbol or a particular grammar rule.
After each step, you can check your progress by building the project and running your test cases.



### References
